What was the word for what?
Qué.
And do you remember how was to pass?
Pasar.
Pasar. And this can also mean like to happen. To pass in the sense of to occur.
How do you say he passes?
Pasa.
Good.
And she passes:
Pasa.
And it passes:
Good.
And if you want to say what passes, meaning what happens, what's going on, what is happening?:
I remembered it now.
I went through the whole process and I remember people saying ¿qué pasó?
This is the past.
We said that when you emphasize that -o on the end it's actually the version for he/she/it in the past, so ¿qué pasó? is what happened?,
and we will look at this later.
But what is what's happening?
What is happening?:
¿Qué pasa?
Good.
So if you want to say I want to know what's going on, I want to know what's happening, I want to know what's passing:
Quiero saber qué pasa.
I want to know what's happening.
Good.
There's one more thing we need to know about the present, and it's gonna fill in, happily, a grey area for us which you might be wondering already: how did we get tiene
he/she/it/you (formal) has or have, and then the other versions tienen, tienes, from tener?
To want is querer.
What is I want?
Quiero.
So how does querer become quiero?
So there's something else we need to know about the present to understand this,
and then we can manage the present completely.
So what's happening is that when we have an e in the “to” form of the verb like in tener: to have, like in querer: to want;
when we have an e inside of the verb it's part of the root, not part of the ending. Not that -er, that doesn't count. But the /e/ in ten- and the /e/ in quer- of
When we stress it, when we emphasize it, it often splits; most of the time, it splits into an ie under the stress of that accent,
under the stress when we say querer we have the accent on the end, we have the accent on the ending.
Then when we take off that -er we put -o, we would have quero but when we stress down that e it splits and it becomes quiero.
The same for tener:
we would have tene for he has, but when we stress down on that e it splits and it becomes tiene.
The same for come.
We have venir. But when we say he comes, she comes, it comes, you (formal) come, it would be vene, but it becomes viene.
Now it's not happening with tengo, vengo, because we can say the n and the g kind of hold it up.
So this is probably why it got saved.
But otherwise it splits.
Now, this might seem quite an abstract thing to get your head around, but what is very helpful is that we have these between words in English and Spanish.
We can identify these between words in English and Spanish.
For example, we have a word that we use for time in English, but only in music.
Do you know what is this word?
A word we use for time but only in music.
When you speak about the time, the rhythm of music, you talk about its:
Beat.
Not beat but tempo.
Now, time in Spanish is tiempo.
You see the difference between tempo and tiempo, other than the Spanish pronunciation,
is that the e has split into ie.
So you can even see it between words in English and Spanish.
Concert in Spanish
is - try and do the same thing.
Concierto.
Concierto. Good.
You stuck in an o to make it sound more Spanish and you split that e.
Concierto.
November is Noviembre.
So this will help us remember.
So this happens most of the time.
We already saw places that it doesn't happen;
we saw very briefly the verb llegar, which was to arrive and we said llego, I arrive.
We saw esperar, which was to wait or to hope,
espero.
It's not happening.
But most of the time it's going to happen.
We saw it happening with tener which became tiene, he/she/it/you (formal), tienen, they or you (plural),
tienes, you (informal).
We saw it happening with venir, to come: viene, vienes, vienen.
Another verb that we see this way is pensar.
What do you think pensar means?
Thoughtful.
But it is a verb.
There is no verb to thoughtful, is there?
Well, to think.
Yes, that's it, to think.
It's very useful for us to group words into families. So "verb" is a family.
So when you decide what type of word it is, then you narrow down the possible behaviors
of that word, and you manage to manage it much easier.
And making that very clearly - that connection - is really really helpful for you. To think, pensar.
So if you say I think, how is it going to be?
Pienso.
Good.
It would be penso but you stress down on that e and it splits into ie and you get pienso.
How is he thinks or she thinks or it thinks or you (formal)?
Piense.
This sounds like vowel harmony.
I mean it sounds nice, piense, because we have ie and then we want to put an e next to it because it matches.
But that's Turkish grammar.
You must know where you are with any verb. And to know where you are you must go back to the “to" form.
Then you are confident.
So it's piensar.
Pensar.
Pensar,
not penser.
No, pensar.
So you must go back there and then you feel confident.
Otherwise the base is going to effect what vowel you want to put on.
Piensa.
You (informal):
Piensas.
Good.
What do you think?:
¿Qué piensas?
Yeah. ¿Qué piensas?
This is a useful verb as well actually. Because if you say I think to eat it means I plan on eating.
You can say I think to eat,
that simple.
I think to eat:
how would it sound?
Pienso comer.
I think to eat later is I plan on eating later.
So how would you say I plan on eating later?
Pienso comer tarde.
That means I plan on eating late,
which is fine, but later is more late. And more is related to massive.
Más tarde.
Good.
Pienso comer más tarde.
I plan on eating later.
So you can use it like that as well.
We saw venir also splits with the exception of vengo.
He comes, she comes, you (formal) - how would that be?
Viene.
They:
Vienen.
You (informal):
Vienes.
Good.
Do you remember how was when?
Cuándo.
When are you coming?:
¿Cuándo vienes?
Entender means to understand.
You can use comprender if you forget it, but entender is better. It's more common.
But comprender is easier because it sounds like comprehend,
and also in comprender the e doesn't split.
I understand is comprendo.
But with entender it does split.
So you can use comprender,
but most common in Spanish is entender for understand.
And here the e does split.
So how would you say I understand?
Entiendo.
How would you say he understands?
Entiende.
Entiende. Good. They:
Entienden.
Perder means to lose.
It's kind of related to perish,
there is a connection there, or perishable food. You know, food that rots, or real food. Perder, to lose.
I lose:
Pierdo.
Good.
The process is perder-perdo, maybe it splits: pierdo.
Good. I lose it:
Lo pierdo.
Lo pierdo. Good.
I lose them:
Los pierdo.
Los pierdo. Good.